---
lang: en
prev: false
title: Lesson (2026-02-23)
---

## What is an operating system?

An operating system is a special program that acts as an intermediary between
the hardware and the software that runs on the computer.

A computer system can be divided into four components:

- hardware:
  - CPU;
  - memory, both RAM and storage;
  - I/O devices;
- operating system: the program that controls and coordinates the use of
  hardware among applications;
- applications: everything that runs on top of the OS;

The OS is a **resource allocator**. It manages all hardware resources and
decides between conflicting requests, allowing for efficient and fair use. It
also has to **control all other programs**, it has to block malicious apps from
causing damage to others running on the same computer.

The core of every operating system is the **kernel**. Everything else is either
a system program (that ships with the OS) or an application.

## Computer startup

At startup, a predefined bootstrap program (for example the BIOS or UEFI) starts
running from a specific memory address. It initializes all the essential
hardware components (registers, memory and device controllers) and puts the
operating system kernel code into main memory.

After that, the startup firmware passes control to the kernel, which begins its
execution.

## Process

A process is a program that is executed.

To start a process the kernel:

1. reads the executable file from the disk into memory;
2. allocates address space, sets up registers and assigns a PID;
3. adds the process to the ready (to be executed) queue;

For single threaded processes, the Program Counter (PC) register specifies the
location of the next instruction to execute.

Some of the OS concerns about processes are:

- creating and deleting them;
- suspending and resuming them (to allow concurrency);
- providing mechanisms for process communication and synchronization;
- preventing deadlocks and improper resource usage;

### Multiprogramming and time sharing

A single user cannot keep CPU and I/O devices busy at all times. With
multiprogramming, the OS organizes jobs so the CPU always has one to execute.

When a process is waiting for an I/O operation to complete, the CPU can run
other apps, thus maximizing resource usage.

Time sharing is an extension of multiprogramming. In a TS system, the CPU
switches jobs so frequently and so fastly that the user has the perception that
many programs are executing at the same time.

:::note

Time sharing is a requirement for windows-like system with an UI that can show
multiple apps together.

:::

## Dual mode operation

The operating system should be able to execute any kind of code, that could have
both positive and negative effects. A malicious process could try to modify the
kernel to allocate more space for itself.

To implement a barrier of security against that, the OS uses some hardware
support. The CPU can switch between user and kernel modes:

- **kernel mode**: is when the kernel runs of course. This mode allows the
  control of all the aspects of the CPU and can be used to switch to user mode.
- **user mode**: is the mode applications code runs in. It is more restrictive
  on the set of instructions allowed and doesn't allow a process to switch to
  kernel mode.

:::note

Modern CPUs support multiple modes of execution, to allow even the kernel to
protect itself from untrusted modules.

:::

How does the OS regain control over the CPU? Obviously we cannot trust a process
to give it back.

CPUs support setting a timer that generates an interrupt. The kernel executes
the interrupt and can thus decide to let the current process run or to give
space to another one.

### Other interrupts

I/O devices and the CPU run on different clocks and can execute concurrently.
Each device controller oversees a particular device and has a local buffer.

There are 2 modes which can be used to signal to the CPU that the requested data
has been loaded from the device:

- polling: the CPU checks periodically that the operation has finished, but its
  expensive;
- interrupts: the controller triggers an interrupt on the CPU, and the kernel
  can manage what to do next. These are called **hardware interrupts**;

Software can also trigger interrupts (for example when dividing by zero or when
making system calls). These are known as **traps** or **exceptions**.

### Interrupt handling

An interrupt triggers a common set of operations whenever it happens:

1. the CPU saves the current PC value to memory;
2. it jumps to the first instruction of the routine that handles the interrupt;
3. it executes the routine;
4. and it jumps back to where the PC of the previous process was;

An operating system is mostly interrupt driven (except from the boot sequence).

### Maskable vs non-maskable interrupts

Not all interrupts have the same importance. During critical operations, some of
them can be ignored:

- maskable: can be ignored while important code is being run;
- non-maskable: cannot be ignored and have to be handled right as they arrive;

## IO subsystem

The storage in a computer system is tiered to benefit from the different
tradeoffs between speed and capacity.

- **main memory**: stores data that the CPU can access directly, typically its
  volatile (it resets on each reboot).
- **secondary storage**: provides larger non volatile storage capacity, it is
  typically implemented using hard disks or solid-state disks.

The disadvantage of reading from slower storage systems can be reduced by
implementing **caching**:

1. The CPU needs to read data.
2. It checks its local cache first.
3. If it doesn't find the data it checks the RAM.
4. It it doesn't find the data again it reads it from the disk.

## Persistent storage management

The OS has to provide an uniform, logical view of information storage.

The abstraction of the physical data into a single logical unit is called a
**file**.

File system management commonly provides:

- organization of files into directories;
- access control;
- OS operations like creating and deleting files and directories, mapping of
  files between memory and secondary storage, ...;

Performance of various levels of storage:

| Name             | Typical size | Implementation                | Access time | Bandwidth   | Managed by       |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ----------------------------- | ----------- | ----------- | ---------------- |
| registers        | < 1 KB       | multiple CMOS ports           | 0.25-0.5 ns | 20-100 Gb/s | compiler         |
| cache            | < 16 MB      | on-chip or off-chip CMOS SRAM | 0.5-25 ns   | 5-10 GB/s   | hardware         |
| main memory      | < 64 GB      | CMOS SRAM                     | 80-250 ns   | 1-5 GB/s    | operating system |
| solid state disk | < 1 TB       | flash memory                  | 25-50 μs    | 500 MB/s    | operating system |
| magnetic disk    | < 10 TB      | magnetic disk                 | 5 ms        | 20-150 MB/s | operating system |

## How modern computers work

Most systems of the past used a single core, general-purpose processor.
Multiprocessor systems are the standard in many applications today, providing:

- true parallel execution;
- increased throughput;
- increased reliability;

In asymmetric multiprocessing, each processor executes a specific task, on
symmetric multiprocessing systems each processor performs all the tasks.

:::note[NUMA systems]

Non-uniform memory access systems are systems where the time that it takes to
access RAM can be very different depending on the location of the data.

The specific timings depend on the physical topology of the system.

:::

## Protection and security

The OS has to protect the system against internal and external attacks, in
particular it has to provide:

- **confidentiality**: absence of unauthorized disclosure of information;
- **availability**: readiness of the service;
- **integrity**: protection against improper system alterations;
