---
description:
  CPU scheduling concepts like MLQ, MFQ, multiprocessor scheduling, and
  real-time algorithms like Rate Monotonic and EDF.
lang: en
title: Lesson (2026-03-12)
---

## Multilevel Queue

The ready queue is partitioned into multiple queues based on priority. This
allows avoidance of an $O(n)$ search when finding the highest priority process.

The parameters that can vary are:

- the number of queues;
- the scheduling algorithm for each queue;
- the method used to determine which queue a process will enter;
- scheduling among the queues;

Prioritization based on the queue structure may lead to starvation for processes
in lower-priority queues.

### Multilevel Feedback Queue (MFQ)

In an MFQ, processes can move between various queues, enabling the
implementation of aging.

An example could be a system with:

- Q0: RR with time quantum 8ms;
- Q1: RR with time quantum 16ms;
- Q2: FSCS;

## Scheduling in multiprocessor systems

On SMP systems, scheduling decisions are made locally on each core. The same
policy is used on all cores, but each one invokes it locally.

Threads may be stored:

- in a common ready queue;
- on a per core queue;

## Hardware threads

Modern CPUs implement threads at the hardware level. For example, two threads
can share the same core, where one runs while the other fetches memory.

## Real time scheduling

- Soft real-time systems: Critical tasks have higher priority but no guarantee
  regarding their scheduling time;
- Hard real-time systems: These systems guarantee that critical tasks are
  scheduled before a specified deadline;

For real-time scheduling, the scheduler must support preemptive, priority-based
scheduling and must be capable of meeting all deadlines.

Periodic processes require the CPU at constant intervals.

### Rate monotonic scheduling

With rate monotonic scheduling, priority is assigned based on the inverse of the
period. Consequently, shorter periods receive higher priority, and longer
periods receive lower priority.

The CPU should be able to run all the necessary periodic jobs and still have
some time to spare.

### Earliest deadline first scheduling

Priorities are assigned according to deadlines. The earlier the deadline, the
higher the priority.

When a process becomes ready, it announces its deadline requirements, which the
scheduler uses to update its decision.

### Proportional share scheduling

A proportional share scheduler allocates $T$ shares among all applications. Each
application will receive $N/T$ shares of processor time.

This guarantees a portion of processor time for each process.
